---
title: yóga
category: 梵
---
## 【释义】
`yóga`, m. (√1. yuj; ifc. f(ā).) the act of yoking, joining, attaching, harnessing, putting to (of horses) RV. MBh. ; a yoke, team, vehicle, conveyance ŚBr. Kauś. MBh. ; employment, use, application, performance RV. &c. &c. ; equipping or arraying (of an army) MBh. ; fixing (of an arrow on the bow-string) ib. ; putting on (of armour) L. ; a remedy, cure Suśr. ; a means, expedient, device, way, manner, method MBh. Kāv. &c. ; a supernatural means, charm, incantation, magical art ib. ; a trick, stratagem, fraud, deceit Mn. Kathās. (cf. yoga-nanda) ; undertaking, business, work RV. AV. TS. ; acquisition, gain, profit, wealth, property ib. Kauś. MBh. ; occasion, opportunity Kām. MārkP. ; any junction, union, combination, contact with (instr. with or without saha, or comp.). MBh. Kāv. &c. (yogam √ i, to agree, consent, acquiesce in anything R.) ; mixing of various materials, mixture MBh. R. VarBṛS. ; partaking of, possessing (instr. or comp.) Mn. R. Hariv. ; connection, relation (yogāt, yogena and yoga-tas ifc. in consequence of, on account of, by reason of, according to, through) KātyŚr. ŚvetUp. Mn. &c. ; putting together, arrangement, disposition, regular succession Kāṭh.; ŚrS. ; fitting together, fitness, propriety, suitability ( °gena ind. and -tas ind. suitably, fitly, duly, in the right manner) MBh. Kāv. &c. ; exertion, endeavour, zeal, diligence, industry, care, attention ( °yoga-tas ind. strenuously, assiduously; pūrṇena yogena, with all one's powers, with overflowing zeal) Mn. MBh. &c. ; application or concentration of the thoughts, abstract contemplation, meditation, (esp.) self-concentration, abstract meditation and mental abstraction practised as a system (as taught by Patañjali and called the Yoga philosophy; it is the second of the two Sāṃkhya systems, its chief aim being to teach the means by which the human spirit may attain complete union with Īśvara or the Supreme Spirit; in the practice of self-concentration it is closely connected with Buddhism) Up. MBh. Kāv. &c. (IW. 92) ; any simple act or rite conducive to Yoga or abstract meditation Sarvad. ; Yoga personified (as the son of Dharma and Kriyā) BhP. ; a follower of the Yoga system MBh. Śaṃk. ; (in Sāṃkhya) the union of soul with matter (one of the 10 Mūlikârthās or radical facts) Tattvas. ; (with Pāśupatas) the union of the individual soul with the universal soul Kulârṇ. ; (with Pāñcarātras) devotion, pious seeking after God Sarvad. ; (with Jainas) contact or mixing with the outer world ib. ; (in astron.) conjunction, lucky conjuncture Lāṭy. VarBṛS. MBh. &c. ; a constellation, asterism (these, with the moon, are called cāndra-yogāḥ and are 13 in number; without the moon they are called kha-yogāḥ, or nābhasa-yogāḥ) VarBṛS. ; the leading or principal star of a lunar asterism W. ; N. of a variable division of time (during which the joint motion in longitude of the sun and moon amounts to 13 degrees 20 minutes; there are 27 such Yogas beginning with Vishkambha and ending with Vaidhṛiti) ib. ; (in arithm.) addition, sum, total Sūryas. MBh. ; (in gram.) the connection of words together, syntactical dependence of a word, construction Nir. Suśr. (ifc. = dependent on, ruled by Pāṇ. 2-2, 8 Vārtt. 1) ; a combined or concentrated grammatical rule or aphorism Pāṇ. Sch. Siddh. (cf. yoga-vibhāga) ; the connection of a word with its root, original or etymological meaning (as opp. to rūḍhi q.v.) Nir. Pratāp. KātyŚr. Sch. ; a violator of confidence, spy L. ; N. of a Sch. on the Paramârthasāra ; [► p. 856c](http://fanfoyan.com/pdfjs/show-mw.html?cur=0856&max=1333&len=4&path=/mw/)

`yógā`, f. N. of a Śakti Pañcar. ; of Pīvarī (daughter of the Pitṛis called Barhishads) Hariv. ; [► p. 856c](http://fanfoyan.com/pdfjs/show-mw.html?cur=0856&max=1333&len=4&path=/mw/)

`yógena`, ind., see yoga , suitably, fitly, duly, in the right manner [► p. 856c](http://fanfoyan.com/pdfjs/show-mw.html?cur=0856&max=1333&len=4&path=/mw/)
